---
title: For the last time, wheel-stop
posted: 2011-04-13
---
todo: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/6695439/how-do-you-create-link-to-a-named-anchor-in-multimarkdown

For the last time, wheel-stop
----------

Fifty years ago, [one man](http://yurisnight.net/) became the first to
fly into space.

Five weeks ago, I watched [Space Shuttle Discoverys final
launch](http://www.flickr.com/photos/mechazoidal/sets/72157626007014505/)
with a group of dear friends.

And one month ago, Discovery made its final touchdown at Kennedy Space
Center.

Discovery is the first of the Shuttles to be completely retired. Even
though it [took
awhile](http://www.spaceflightnow.com/shuttle/sts133/101203delay/index.html)
to get off the ground this time, it gave a magnificent performance for
its swan song.

Like the Concorde, and the family's 1978 Nova, its painful to see the
Shuttles retired when they've got a spark or two left. But on the other
hand, I know that there's not much more that can be done with them. The
shuttles are high-maintenance machines spawned both from the Apollo era,
and a host of requirements that vanished in the time it took to build
them.

However, [Phil Plait already covered that
ground](http://blogs.discovermagazine.com/badastronomy/2011/04/12/a-half-century-of-manned-space-exploration)
much better than I could hope to. And the Kennedy Space Center Staff
[did their own send-off](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tr-yTbWuhWE) .
That's not what this post ended up being about.

### A path for those behind us

I cant recall a time in my life without the shuttle program. I had a
[Skylab pop-up
book](http://www.movablebooksociety.org/popupbooks/BookS/S132.html),
which I'm pretty sure ended with "one day, our future spaceplanes will
visit this station". (Whoops)

For kindergarten, my mom sewed me a naptime pillow. On one side were the
usual SF rocketships. But the other side was an iron-on transfer of
Columbias first landing in 1981, with the legend First Spaceship Lands
on Earth.

My class was too young to be watching Challengers last launch directly,
but I remember the teacher tearfully showing us newspaper articles on
the accident. I was playing on the carpet in front of the TV when Dan
Rather started mentioning O-rings. Odyssey Magazine dedicated an issue
to explaining the findings of the Rogers Commission, which I re-read for
a month.[Feynman](#Feynman) {{1}}

### The dreams of those who have fallen…

The [Pacific Science Center](http://www.pacsci.org/) was a staple of
Saturday afternoons and childhood memories alike. {{2}} Their IMAX
theatre ran [Hail Columbia](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0084043/)
nonstop until [The Dream is Alive](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0089050/)
came out. Dad took us to both, but all I remember was being scared to
death of the SRB ignition in full IMAX® audio. For most films in the
years afterwards, I had my hands over my ears until I was sure no
rockets were about to take off. {{3}}

On every visit to the Science Center though, my brother and I would
always insist on one thing: to sit in the centers [Gemini
capsule](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Project_Gemini#Spacecraft) mockup.
Wed sit in both seats, pretend to be flying in space, and madly flip
switches until other impatient kids kicked us out. [And the mockup
wasnt a kitbash of old car
parts](http://www.flickr.com/photos/king_aevil/4607521943/in/photostream)
: looking into actual Gemini capsules at Kennedy, only the presence of a
flight stick stopped the spooky sense that'd I'd flipped those same
switches before.

Today, NASA announced the final retirement destinations of all four
remaining orbiters. None are going to the Seattle Museum of Flight.

[But one of Johnson Space Centers simulators
is.](http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/localnews/2014751898_shuttledecision13m.html)

### ...The hopes of those who will follow

Even with the thorough scrubbing and decontamination, the odds are good
that most museums aren't ever going let visitors inside a real Shuttle.
I'm not aware of any actual used space hardware that the public can
really touch—always out of reach, behind a velvet rope.

Tactile science was a big, big part of my growing up, even if parts of
it left me in tears. Theres still very little thats completely
hands-off at PSC, and the Museum of Flight has plenty of kid-friendly
exhibits. Plus, yknow, sitting in cockpits.

With a full-size Shuttle simulator, the sky's the (ahem) limit for the
Museum. Maybe theyll open it up to walkthroughs, like their ISS module
mockup. Or maybe they'll run actual sim missions in it for visitor
groups. Whichever they choose, it means that more people can actually
feel what it'd be like, just a little bit. And that little bit, coupled
with an active imagination, can take you very far indeed.

### Those two sets of dreams weave together.

The Gemini flights were finished decades before I was even born. But
that didn't stop me, my brother, and untold others from sitting in those
hard metal chairs and dreaming.

The Gemini mockup is still at Pacific Science Center. And now, the
Museum of Flight will have its own piece of tactile space history.

I'm looking forwards towards seeing the next generation get inspired.

\
\
\

### Feynman ###
Unfortunately, Feynmans contributions were minimized in the
original report, so it wasn't until college that I learned of his
[icewater hijinks](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8qAi_9quzUY).[[1]]

[[2]] Since they never really cleaned their [reflective
pools](http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:PacScienceCenterNight1.jpg),
I liked to pretend that the water was sixty feet deep, and [Tranzor
Z](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lVkueSuO-GU) would be launching any
minute.[[2]] [[3]] PSC never failed to alternately fascinate and terrify
me. Their [Mt. St.
Helens](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1980_eruption_of_Mount_St._Helens)
exhibit gave me nightmares for half a decade.[[3]]
